[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When it comes
to crystal healing,
the question everyone wants
to know is what crystal heals
what?
To understand the specific
effects a crystal may have,
we first need to
know how crystals
manifest healing powers.
In this episode, you will
learn the metaphysics
behind crystal healing
by exploring the seven
rays of light, the
Daoist elixir fields,
and how the planets
channel archetypal energy
through Vedic astrological gems.
These esoteric systems inform
us on how crystals specialize
their abilities, so we can
begin to understand what
crystal heals what and why.
>> Gems and crystals work with
light and color frequency,
which affects our energy
body, as well as the karmic
tendencies that we can see
in our astrological charts.
Humans have electromagnetic
fields around them,
commonly known as auras.
And the right gems can boost
the aura and enhance it.
And the wrong gems can
diminish it and throw us
into a state of imbalance.
>> The colors really make a
difference when we're talking
about the metaphysical
properties of the crystals,
because metaphysically we're
talking about light, energy,
spiritual energy,
metaphysical energy.
We all kind of use these
terms interchangeably.
And anytime we're
talking about light,
whether we're talking
spiritual light
or physical photonic
light, the crystals
will take that light
in and optically
shift it or they might refract
it, they might reflect it,
they might absorb it,
they might redirect it.
So the crystals work
with this light,
both physical and metaphysical.
And then the other
thing I would add
to the metaphysical
properties of crystals
is that these crystals are--
they have a form of
consciousness to them.
They have their
own spirit essence.
In the ancient
alchemical tradition,
everything had spirit.
Everything had soul.
Everything had body.
We call these the
three essentials.
>> In crystal healing, the
energy centers called chakras
or wheels of light are the
primary placement points
for the crystals.
The crystals infuse the chakras
with associated color and light
frequency.
The chakras interface
the physical body
to our subtle bodies
or aura, and are
connected to specific glands,
functions, and themes.
Each energy center has a
signature vibratory rate
which has distinct
physical, psychological,
or spiritual correspondences.
Crystals activate the chakras
to align with the central line
channel, also
called the Sushumna.
This in turn stimulates the
Ida, the moon channel connected
to the parasympathetic
nervous system,
and the Pingala, the
sun channel connected
to the sympathetic
nervous system.
Harmonizing our feminine
and masculine impulses.
With the support of the
crystals on our chakras,
the goal is to balance the
duality of yin and yang forces
within us.
So the dormant central line
channel can fully light up,
and opening the pathway for
the flow of vital life force
energy towards the upper
chakras of spiritual connection.
>> The color of a crystal is
one of the main attributes that
determines the effect it will
have on our health and energy.
So the understanding
of the color
or rays as they are sometimes
called is very important.
Generally speaking, when
there is a chronic illness,
there is usually a depletion
of energy in a chronic illness.
So you want to add energy so
you'll be using a warm color.
For example, the red is
the warmest of their color.
And that is a ruby,
or you will use
orange, which is also a warm
color with madeira citrine
or carnelian.
And the yellow, which is the
highest of the warm color,
with the yellow citrine
or the golden topaz.
And then when you
have a person who
has an acute pain or illness,
meaning that something recent
usually, where there's a lot
of accumulation of energy,
where there is
inflammation, well, you're
going to use cool color.
So you will go for blue,
which is like the aquamarine.
You can go for the sapphire,
which is the indigo ray.
It's a deep blue
with the sapphire--
I have a little sapphire there
on my bolo or azurite crystal.
And the violet, which is
the highest of them all.
The violet, the amethyst,
which is very popular today.
If you want balance, stability,
energizing, yet soothing,
life-giving vitality,
you go to green.
So you want to
have emerald and/or
chrysoprase or green jasper.
These stones will bring
the color of the heart,
will bring stability.
And they are the
color of healing.
Green is the color of healing.
If you don't know which to use,
when in doubt, choose green.
You'll never go wrong.
So the seven rays are the
seven colors of the rainbow.
And they correspond also
with your energy centers,
what some people call chakras,
which are in the middle string.
>> Typically, we want to work
with the crystals of the color
that corresponds
with the chakra.
So for example,
the crown chakra we
might work with either amethyst
or purple or just clear
quartz and white stones.
With the third eye, you
might work with indigo
or like a dark blue.
With a throat, a lighter blue.
With the heart, a green.
All the green stones,
but also the pink stones
are very much heart-centered.
Solar plexus kind of
the yellow colors.
The hara, the orange ones.
And then the root, the red ones.
So this is a general
place to start.
>> The Daoists have a different
understanding of our energy
centers than the
yogic traditions do.
The yogic traditions
have seven chakras
that are associated with
the colors of the spectrum.
The Daoists have
three elixir fields
which relate to the
Daoist alchemical process
of personal transformation.
The three areas of the
body are the lower abdomen,
chest and upper abdomen, and
the throat and head region.
The lower abdomen is an
area that is energetically
attached to our Jing,
our physical essence,
our substance.
Stones that are most
effective for this purpose
are ones that are
known to break up
accumulations in this region.
They have dark colors,
and are especially
in the agate and jasper
family, or the aventurines
because they also
break up accumulations.
The chest region
and upper abdomen
is associated with Qi or energy.
Energy is how we
interact with the world.
Stones to affect
this region could
be white colored for the lungs,
red or pink for the heart,
and yellow or orange for
the stomach and spleen.
The upper region gives us access
to heaven, to spirit or Shen.
The so-called third eye
was considered by Daoists
to be the single eye, because
when a practitioner was
cultivating this region,
judgments and comparisons began
to fall away.
Separations fell away.
Everything could be seen
as emanations of the one.
A stone that could be used
for this level of cultivation
is the diamond.
Its hardness conveys
great confidence in what
the practitioner has achieved.
However, it can be
very dangerous to work
on this region
without having already
cleared up the lower two areas.
People can go mad if they aren't
clear of habitual thoughts
and beliefs.
>> Another ancient system of
healing with crystals is Vedic
gemology, which prescribes
a specific gem based
on your Vedic birth chart to
balance out any challenging
tendencies within you, transmute
any karma you don't want,
and boost your positive inner
resources so you can live
your best life.
>> In Vedic gemology, there are
nine precious gemstones that
correspond with the nine
planets in the solar system.
When the sun is a beneficial
influence for the wearer's
astrological chart,
the sun can be
strengthened with a Vedic
astrological quality ruby.
Ruby is considered
the king of gems.
This can promote brilliance,
empowerment, respect,
recognition, fame.
It can help with integration
with the divine and the highest
sense of self, one's true
potential and authority
in all areas of life.
The second gem we're going to
discuss is pearl for the moon.
Moon often is used to
directly represent ourselves
in Vedic astrology.
But it's more of
the emotional side,
the psyche, the inner workings.
So the moon overall
signifies our emotions,
the watery changing
cyclical energy of them.
And moon also relates to mother
figures and higher intuition.
When we wear a pearl, if
it's a beneficial influence
for the wearer's chart and its
proper astrological quality,
it can lead to greater
emotional balance, peace,
clearer intuition, states of
ease, benefit to mother figures
and home life.
When mercury is a beneficial
planet in the wearer's
astrological chart,
they can strengthen it
by wearing a Vedic emeralds.
The reported benefits usually
revolve around clarity.
Clarity of the mind, sharper
communication skills,
enhanced wit and humor.
Also business success and travel
success, more efficient travel.
And overall, just more rapid
processing of information.
Mars is the planet of physical
endurance, assertiveness,
courage, strength, and
overcoming battles.
If Mars is a beneficial
influence for the wearer
and it will keep them in a state
of balance to wear a red coral,
it can produce more courage
and physical strength
and motivation and vitality and
athletic ability and victory
over conflict.
Venus is the planet
of love and astrology.
It also overlords creativity
and fine arts and beauty.
If Venus is a beneficial
influence in the wearer's
astrological chart, they can
strengthen it even further
by wearing a Vedic diamond.
The most common benefits of
diamond are enhanced and more
fulfilling relationships.
Increased creative potential.
More luxury.
More refinement and
fulfillment in day-to-day life.
Saturn is one of the most
misunderstood planets
in all forms of astrology.
People fear its
power because it's
very heavy and prevalent
and noticeable.
And it can be very intense.
Saturn can bring consequence.
But it's usually in response
to idleness or laziness
or incoherence or carelessness
in a person's life.
Excellent results
can be achieved
if channeling Saturn energy
into the wearer's body
is done wisely.
If Saturn is a
beneficial planet,
they can wear an astrological
quality blue sapphire.
This can bring about an increase
in focus and self-discipline,
greater work ethic,
organization, commitment,
and spiritual development.
Jupiter is considered one of the
greatest beneficial influences
in all forms of astrology.
Where Saturn is associated
with constriction,
Jupiter is associated
with expansion.
It represents the generous, the
benevolent side of humanity.
If Jupiter is a beneficial
influence in the wearer's
astrological chart, they can
strengthen it even further
with a Vedic yellow sapphire.
This will promote wealth
expansion, wisdom, education,
health of children,
and generosity
towards others, which comes
around karmically pretty
full circle.
Rahu and Ketu are
not actually planets,
but technically, they're
mathematical points in space.
They're known as the
north and south nodes.
But in Vedic astrology,
they're known as Rahu and Ketu
if it's appropriate for the
wearer's astrological chart.
A hessonite, the
gemstone for Rahu
can bring about a
sense of protection,
and it can also bring
about wealth and fame.
Ketu or the south
node of the moon
represents enlightenment,
liberation,
detachment from anything
that may be holding us
down in the material world.
And in certain contexts, it
can be appropriate for somebody
to strengthen Ketu
with a Vedic cat's eye.
But we have to be very careful
because out of balance, this
can create an increase in
detachment and eccentricity
that doesn't meld or
relate to society.
So for spiritual
monks who are looking
for this liberation
from attachment,
it can be a great stone.
But for most people
trying to integrate more
in their day-to-day lives
and in the material world,
I exercise a great deal of
caution with this gemstone.
>> In addition to the highly
specific and powerful functions
of Vedic gems, there are many
other quick and accessible ways
to find a crystal that
truly supports you.
>> I might go into a New Age
shop to look for a stone that
will attract love into my life.
I look at the signs around
all the various stones
and I see that rose
quartz is the one.
It's the one I need.
And this is true.
Rose quartz can attract love.
But there's more to it.
Why is it that I am having
difficulty attracting love
in the first place?
I need to take the time
to look inside objectively
to understand the obstacle.
Am I a very rigid person?
Am I very set in my ways,
unable to bend my routines
to accommodate others?
Is there room for
someone else in my life?
Am I fearful of intimacy?
Do I have a history
of sexual trauma?
Do I tend to be very irritable
if someone challenges
my habitual behavior so
that I'm uncomfortable
in a relationship?
Does it make me feel not
good enough, inadequate?
Rose quartz doesn't address
any of these particular issues.
But there are other
stones that do.
So this is how we start
intelligently combining stones.
Yes, I want love.
So I put a chunk or sphere of
rose quartz in the bedroom.
Every time I go in, I'm reminded
this is the priority in my life
right now.
If I'm rigid, I can use a
stone with no structure,
an amorphous stone like opal.
I can wear it as a
pendant touching the skin
at the center of my chest
to help me relax my tightly
held views, my judgments.
Clear quartz is one of
the most important healing
crystals for several reasons.
Number one, quartz
is an amplifier.
Quartz will take in the
energy that's given to it,
and then put a resonant
amplified field back.
It really magnifies the
light that shines through it.
Quartz also has its own
electrical properties.
So for example if it's exposed
to an electromagnetic field,
that electromagnetic
field will actually
distort the lattice
inside the quartz.
And then when it's
released, we get
what's called the
piezoelectric effect.
So then the quartz
will start to put out
its own electric
resonant energy.
We are bioelectric
beings as well.
And we have electromagnetic
field that our bodies put off.
As we're sending energy
through the quartz,
we're flowing this kind
of electromagnetic energy.
And then the quartz
can help amplify
that with its own properties.
And then because
quartz is clear,
it is said metaphysically to
channel that pure white light
or that source of light from
the highest spiritual self.
That highest spiritual energy.
And so quartz just takes
that energy in and flows it,
but brings it through
in an amplified way.
And so quartz is really
powerful for just channeling
that pure white light.
>> Clear quartz has the
same molecular structure
as the first energy field
around the human being,
which is called the etheric web.
Thus, the crystal quartz will
naturally and automatically
heal the etheric web by
bringing an appropriately
purified clear quartz
through the etheric web,
we give the person what
is called a crystal bath.
This will start
and often complete
healing of the etheric web
if it has holes, tears,
or imbalances.
>>Black tourmaline
is so practical,
I always use it in my crystal
healing layouts for grounding.
They are loving, friendly,
supplying us with light force
while they diligently
recycle dense energies
into positive ones.
Black tourmaline possess both
pyroelectric and piezoelectric
qualities.
Black tourmaline can
balance polarities.
They stimulate
the nervous system
and purifies the aura from
all kinds of energetic debris.
It also has the added
benefit of being
an antioxidant with
a trace mineral
boron found in its composition.
Black tourmaline
is gifted when it
comes to transmuting
negative energy
into usable positive energy.
>> Azurite is a wonderful
stone for the eyes.
When we get eyestrain from
looking into the computer too
much at night
before sleep, we can
place small pieces of azurite.
They call these blueberries on
the inner corner of the eye.
Its chemical composition is
copper and water, both of which
are very effective
conductors of energy.
The water additionally helps
hydrate the eyes to help
cool them off and moisten them.
Because of its
chemical composition,
it's also a good stone for
acute injuries or after surgery,
or for any area of pain.
Any stone with high
copper content,
such as malachite or chrysocolla
can be used for this purpose.
These two are almost
better than azurite,
because it's easier to get
them in a polished state.
You can use them to massage
the injured painful area
or to gently rub scar tissue.
>> Azurite and red coral,
and I use them most often
because they work
directly with the bones.
And with alleviating
pain in tendons
and bones and articulations.
For example, if I have a broken
arm here, I had it broken once,
I bring the red coral
like this along the bone.
And what it does is it
enhances the multiplication
of the creation of bone cells.
So your fracture heals
like two times faster.
And then with the
azurite, same thing.
You take away the pain.
Tendonitis with azurite,
it's gone almost in minutes.
>> Hematite is a powerful ally
and premium grounding stone
which supports our
connection to Mother Earth.
Hematite helps us to establish
healthy personal boundaries,
and encourage us to take
life into our own hands
with focus and confidence.
Hematite gathers wandering,
confused, and ungrounded
energies, dissolves
negativity, and draws it down
for integration.
With a stable and secure
base grounded and connected
to earth, we have
the possibility
to soar higher into
the astral realms
and beyond without getting lost.
Hematite is good to carry
on airplanes for jet lag,
for daydreamers,
sleepwalkers, before and after
anesthesia or any time
life presents itself
with intense, shocking,
or stressful situations.
Hematite keeps all the subtle
bodies linked to the material
plane, so we can be present.
Hematite's gray,
black, silver ray
conceals the red ray,
which is revealed
when it is rubbed
against a streak plate
or in the stone grinder.
The bright red dust left
behind gives hematite
the name bloodstone.
And being 70% iron
and 30% oxygen
is known to revitalize the
blood, the circulatory system,
and support blood related
issues in general.
>> Crystals really
want to serve.
They want to serve.
So this is one of the reasons
why I think they're so popular
and they're so universal.
And everybody's going to
benefit from working with them.
>> With hundreds of
crystals on our planet,
finding out which one is the
best match for you could feel
overwhelming.
As explained by our
experts, crystals
and their infinite
array of properties
are truly spectacular allies
and friends that can help us,
that are all around us, and
that have been here all along.
[MUSIC PLAYING]